With Christie and capital improvements, the city
stopped trying to put them through in about, what,
74, 75? Oh, I don't know. That may not be really
quite right. We used to have it very specific.
First, it was a five-year plan. Then we made a
six-year plan. And then we made it three years
specific and three years general. For capital
improvements in the city? Yeah. I think the three
years specific and the three years general is
probably more practical than the five-year plan.
And then we started to just have an intense capital
improvement program. At the same time, we were
planning to have a bond issue. And we were having
bond issues every three to five years. And so
really every three years, I guess, over the last
decade or so. So the cattle improvement program
was really honed down and got specific around that
bond issue. So this was the next three years and
then beyond without any kind of time frame. So we
didn't get involved with all this business about
trying to get people's expectations up for the
fourth and fifth and sixth years. when you had no
idea what reality might be at that time. I'll never
forget one project called Caroline. Remember
Caroline? Right, yeah. Caroline was scheduled
for improvements in 1958 on one of these listed
capital improvements. And I had to suffer with
that from 1958 until I guess Caroline was finally
paid. And
it's all paid now. I think so. I mean, I remember
part of it being paved in the mid-'60s when I used to
go out in that area of town. Mid-'60s? Seems like it
was mid-'60s. Well, I was driving by 65 or 66, so.
I've forgotten. I think Carolina was paved in the
70s, the part that I'm talking about. I mean,
completely paved out. Yeah, curb and gutter and
sidewalk and all. Yeah. But 15 years, whatever it
was, 20 years later, And yet, the reason was it
shouldn't have been put there in the first place.
Carol Lane, I mean, it shouldn't have been on the
capital improvement program in the first place.
Was it too early? Yeah, in terms of priorities. In
fact, I don't know that it was in their best
interest to have it paved when it was paved.
Because Carol Lane was sitting there with its
residential nature pretty well preserved. It
didn't have to happen what happened to Earhart. It
was still residential in nature. Well, who was
setting up those priorities for the... The usual
staff. At that time it was headed by planning and it
was backed up by public works and engineering.
But there's no way to set priorities like that and
make sense out of them that far ahead of time. If you
think about planning and
We've been fighting here, our sewer planning. We
had a very optimistic plan submitted three years
ago before Peso collapsed. And the city was
growing it very rapidly. But we're having to eat
that plan now because this involves the state and
the EPA and everybody. And they want us to prove
that our new growth forecasts are correct. Well,
I'll tell you right now, there's nobody in this
town who can forecast more than three months ahead
of time right now. We don't know where the city's
going next year, next five years. We don't know the
next three months. Look at the major economic
activities that have happened in South Texas over
the last 20 years and ask yourself how many of them
were forecasted. Almost no one forecasted what
was going to happen to the price of natural gas.
Next to nobody. Even though everybody had a kind of
vague feeling about the peso going down, nobody
forecasted even to the year. Or to the extent. Or to
the extent, right.
Nobody really forecasted the impact of the
problems with foreign oil. You can identify
almost every really major impact on South Texas,
and it wasn't anybody's plan. And so that doesn't
mean we shouldn't plan, because we need to have the
plan set forth. But we've got to recognize that
those places where the plan tends to get stuck and
rigid have to be avoided. And that's what the
capital improvement program process was doing.
You get people who had no idea what was going to
happen six years from now trying to forecast six
years hence. Well, it's nice to forecast the
things you have a fairly good idea about. You can
come pretty close to forecasting such values, I
think. And you can relate that to the consumption
of land. If we grow 2,000 people a year or for six
years, that's 12,000 people. And the average
family size is three plus, whatever it is. And that
equates to 4,000 families. And 4,000 families
equates to, we'll say, 700 acres or 600 acres of
land. So it's reasonable. When we look at the whole
city and we say, well, we think this guy's going to
be able to put up a 40-acre development here. This
is going to happen over here. And we've got sewer
service here and water service here. Yeah, we can
take care of 700 families this way and that way.
That's good planning, as long as you realize that
it needs to stay that flexible, that you obviously
covered a whole bunch of assumptions there. Now
for us to start getting specific and saying in the
fourth year, we're going to build this road,
because there are going to be 200 or more houses out
here, all of a sudden it's starting to get awfully
fuzzy, because those 200 houses may come first,
they may come last. Now, if we have a good reason why
they might come first, that's something else.
Let's say there's a big ministry going down the
street from them, and yes, that makes sense that
that's going to be the hottest area. Well, then
maybe we can show that as a priority street in the
first year. But it sure gets weak by the fifth year,
and the sixth year, and the seventh year. I think
somebody's tried the 10-year program. That's
just wild. To me, if you can't show how you're going
to pay for it, then you probably aren't going to get
the quality of decision-making that you need from
them. first-level planner, to the city manager,
to the city council, to the planning commission. I
watch so many planning commissions sit down with
the capital improvement program and say, well,
what's the bond election going to be, and where's
the money coming from, and for all the stuff that
the money's not set for, they just don't even read
it. And all of a sudden, that becomes the approved
program. Somebody says, when's my street going to
be paved? Oh, well, you're set down in the fifth
year, ma'am. And what level of decision would you
do it? Some low staff person scheduled it. And
everybody else was too busy worrying about these
first three years to even look at this fifth year.
And all of a sudden, a whole bunch of false
expectations. People saying, ah, my storm
steward's in the fifth year. That's 1987. I can
count on that. So you're saying that anything
after three years. Well, after the time that you
can pay for it. Because you don't get the decision
making process doesn't work unless you've got to
pay for what your dreams are. All you're doing is
listing projects. We had a project in Corpus
Christi that made it into four or five capital
improvement programs. And it was for the birds. I
feel guilty as much as anybody else. I didn't
really think of it and thought through well
enough. But still, I knew it was representing a
problem. Six points. Why? You know, six points
back in the late 50s was just a traffic nightmare
before the Crosstown Expressway opened up.
Terrible, you know. If you had to go to work through
six points, you added 10 minutes time to that
thing. So our people came up with a fancy plan to go
around Six Points, bypass around Six Points, and
then to parallel 6th and 7th, I think it was, it may
have been 5th and, no, it may have been 7th, I think
it was 5th, 6th and 7th Street. By Spahn Hospital?
Yeah. Right, yeah. Well, this side of Spahn
Hospital, I say this side, you know, between Spahn
and Six Points. Yeah, between Spahn and Six
Points. To parallel those and to come down, and
also to cut... The Del Mar 3rd connection, right
through that block there by Spahn Hospital, right
through all those houses, so that you can make that
transition smoothly without having to go and make
a right-hand turn, a left-hand turn. Dumb
recommendation, that one. That's one of the
dumbest. I didn't know a person in the city that's
ever been hurt by having to turn down Del Mar and
then make a left-hand turn versus being able to
merge in across those fine houses. I think it only
takes about six or seven of those houses out in
order to make that a smooth transition. What does a
smooth transition do? In fact, it makes the
traffic a little slower to make them have to make a
right-hand turn than a left-hand turn. But
anyway, this was grandiose and crazy. I mean, it
was going to be expensive. It involved putting
some parking lots in Six Points and buying all that
property. And it involved making Alameda become
Staples. And Staples became, let's see.
Anyway, I guess going south, Staples continued to
be Staples and Alameda No, Alameda, that's right.
Alameda became Staples, and Staples became
Alameda. Alameda was over there by the Six Points
Theater. And in essence, it left the Six Points
area as Staples. Alameda came in, and it went north
as Staples. Great project if money was no object,
and if somebody had some redevelopment plans to go
with it. But it was a transportation planner's
project. The truth of the matter is, the property
owners didn't really agree. There was no money for
the parking lots. And if you moved all the traffic
around it, you'd probably kill six points. You
didn't have that much capacity to come back. The
economic activity around it wasn't sufficient to
make that a really desirable location. So what we
would have probably done is simply kill what was
there and spend millions of dollars on this cotton
picking way around the circle. A few years later,
some relatively simple traffic signal
improvements were made, and the drainage
problems were corrected, and the streets were
paying better. And I don't think anybody today
would recommend that grandiose plan of Six
Points. It economically didn't make any sense.
You're spending so much money for the few stores
that were left, and in the process, isolating
those stores from their own customers. And Six
Points, actually, one of its biggest customers is
its walk-in traffic from the older neighborhood
out toward Delmar. And by doing this, she made it
almost impossible for the person to walk there to
get there. So how was that plan defeated then? It
just died in the planning department? No, no, no.
Well, I mean, first of all, it just got kicked out of
capital improvement programs. But the point I'm
making is for two or three years, it was in there.
People were saying, hey, this is a scheduled
project. Why isn't it on the next bond election?
And it never really was thought through well. It
was a transportation planner's solution that
never had to stand the test of reality of going
through the whole process of other departments
giving and taking and the planning commission
criticism and the honest ending cost estimates as
to what it was going to cost. Because it was in the
plan and not in the real program. And that to me just
almost forces the current planning process to be
tied to a real program where the planner and the
operator have to make it happen. Like how much
community development money are you going to have
in the next three years? That's real. What's the
opportunity to get federal funds through the
highway department? That's real. The bond issue?
That's real. And the Corpus Christi had to have an
election for every bond issue. Now, those are real
things. If you're going to have to raise the money,
then you've really put the project through the
ringer. And when it comes out, you're willing to
pay for it. But the rest of it. You just kind of say,
well, we'll show it as bond issues. We'll show
we're going to have $5 million this year, $6
million next, $7 million, $8 million, $9 million,
$10 million, $11 million. We're going to finance
it like so. We're going to sell as many revenue
bonds as we need. So we'll sell a bunch of sewerage
bonds to the sewer plants. Just very rarely do you
see a capital improvement program when they
really say that in the fifth year, it's going to
require a 75% sewer rate increase, or it's going to
require taxes or less than so. They just address
the first part of the plan. Well, I appreciate you
going into that, and I thank you very much for your
time. Is that really what you need? Well, it's
given me a lot of good information, and I think
about the growth of Corpus Christi, and perhaps
it's
a... Everyone has their own particular point of
view, and if we're going to look at how planning has
affected the growth of a city... We'd like to get
the points of view of a group of people who are
involved in the growth, not just one person, not
just one department at one specific time. I feel
very strongly about protecting the Bayfront. I do
too. I'm not so sure it's being protected right
now. That's one reason I'm down here and not over
there. development of the bayfront and the beach,
for that matter. The beach is going to be one of the
long, low condominiums. Block to block, you're
not going to be able to hit that peak. If you're not
in the first half of the block, you're not even
going to be able to see it before approaching the
beach. You'll probably notice the star of the
condominiums. And they're so eager to get
commercial uses on the bayfront that it's just
killing them. Who is that? Well, it was the last
council. which literally is the reason I'm not
there. Is it a mixture of council, Chamber of
Commerce? Oh, not so much Chamber of Commerce.
Maybe it's been council, which has been
controlled by developers, and they've just been
so gung-ho to make things happen on that paper.
Mayor Pro Tem said to me one day over a cocktail that
if I push the paper on development projects, that
she'd be with me 100%, and if I wouldn't, she was
going to get me. That's how important it was to her.
And I never really have understood exactly why. Of
course, most of that council was in the
development business. There were people who
either their hobby or who had direct livelihood
was construction, condominiums,
semi-condominiums, that kind of thing. I'm not
saying that the projects are all bad. There have
been some nice projects. But that cocktail bar
marina office, have you been along the background
recently? Uh, well, yeah. Yeah, I have. Well, you
may not have noticed it yet, but on the middle
teahead, where the Marine Office used to be,
Lawrence Street Teahead? Right. The Marine
Office was taken out with Hurricane Allen, and
they, with a private-public participation
cooperation project, they put back a new Marine
Office, but it's got a big cocktail-inch grill on
top of it. And it just stands up like an elephant out
there in the water. But I hope they don't do too much
of that. But they've been pushing this bill. And I
don't know whether you keep up with the discussion
or not. Yeah, I do. All of a sudden, a couple weeks
ago, there was this amazing discovery that there
was going to be a problem with B zones. I don't know
if you're familiar with B zones or not. But in the
floodplain area. Right. Is that something to do
with insurance? Yeah, a federal insurance
program. But if the city agrees to clean it,
they've got to comply with all the rules. And you
can't build below the floodplain. Well, on the
Gulf side, there's what's called a velocity zone
on top of it, a V-zone. And they're saying now that
this is brand new information to them. Well, a
V-zone presentation was made as a factor after
Hurricane Alan. And that was 1980, OK. All of a
sudden, there's news, news about the V-Zone. How
that's going to cause the landfill problem. I just
laughed up my sleeve. Everybody knew. It was in the
papers, even. The fact that, see, that's one of the
reasons why it took so long to repair some of the
stuff after Hurricane Allen, was the feds were
saying that the improvements are going to have to
be consistent with the V-Zone calculations.
Well, the hotels are happening. I guess I didn't
mention that. That was always a major concern, is
that we have hotels that support the convention
center. And I felt very confident that it happened
as soon as the interest rates dropped. Remember,
when the convention center was finished, the
interest rates were way up in the 16th, 17th, 18th
percent period. And it was obvious to most of us
that when the interest rates dropped, that part
would take care of itself and get Marriott and
Treasury Harbor House and the... That's why it's
been on the beach and two of the others have built
this in the last couple of years. It certainly has
changed the look of downtown Corpus Christi quite
a bit. Well, thank you. I really appreciate your
time. You're welcome. Good luck to you.